README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# almanac

<!-- badges: start -->

<!-- badges: end -->

almanac provides tools for working with dates relative to business
calendars. Specifically, it provides utilities to:

  - Create calendar objects with predefined holidays / weekends.

  - Extend or tweak these calendar objects with custom holidays.

  - Shift dates forwards or backwards relative to a calendar, skipping
    over weekends and holidays.

  - Generate date sequences relative to a calendar, skipping over
    weekends and holidays.

## Installation

You can NOT install almanac from [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org).

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("DavisVaughan/almanac")
```

## Examples

``` r
library(almanac)
library(lubridate, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
set.seed(123)
```

Imagine you have a sequence of business dates indexing some value, like
a business cost.

``` r
costs <- tibble(
  cost = rnorm(5, mean = 10000, sd = 500),
  dates = as.Date("2019-02-13") + c(0:2, 6:7)
)

costs
#> # A tibble: 5 x 2
#>     cost dates     
#>    <dbl> <date>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20
```

Importantly, these are *business dates*. Generally, that means that
there won’t be any weekend values, and holidays are observed and also
won’t generate any values. In this data set, `02/16 - 02/17` is a
weekend, and `02/18` is Valentine’s Day.

To perform any kind of rolling calculation correctly, you might need to
“look forwards” by some number of business days. This is different
from just looking forward “1 day”, because when you are at Friday, you
really want to look forward to Monday. But if Monday is a holiday (as it
is here\!), you really want that to actually shift to Tuesday, the
actual next business day.

almanac provides tools for constructing calendars with holidays and
weekend support to help with these problems.

Notice that in the example below, `"2019-02-15"` is shifted to
`"2019-02-19"` when we request a 1 day shift (using a
`lubridate::days()` period object\!). It skips over the weekend and
Valentine’s Day to locate the next business day.

In the 5 day shift, `"2019-02-19"`, a Tuesday, is shifted all the way to
`"2019-02-26"`, the next Tuesday, which corresponds to a “business week”
and skips over the weekend.

``` r
# Construct a calendar object, the default is a US calendar
cal <- calendar()
cal
#> <Calendar: united_states>

# Use the new calendar object alongside `cal_shift()` to shift 
# by a number of business days.
costs %>%
  mutate(
    dates_wday = wday(dates, label = TRUE),
    one_day = cal_shift(dates, days(1), cal = cal),
    one_wday = wday(one_day, label = TRUE),
    five_days = cal_shift(dates, days(5), cal = cal),
    five_wday = wday(five_days, label = TRUE),
  )
#> # A tibble: 5 x 7
#>     cost dates      dates_wday one_day    one_wday five_days  five_wday
#>    <dbl> <date>     <ord>      <date>     <ord>    <date>     <ord>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13 Wed        2019-02-14 Thu      2019-02-21 Thu      
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14 Thu        2019-02-15 Fri      2019-02-22 Fri      
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15 Fri        2019-02-19 Tue      2019-02-25 Mon      
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19 Tue        2019-02-20 Wed      2019-02-26 Tue      
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20 Wed        2019-02-21 Thu      2019-02-27 Wed
```

You can tweak the calendar by adding new holidays, or removing existing
ones. Here we add Thursday the 21st as a holiday, but remove Valentine’s
Day for that year.

``` r
cal_tweaked <- cal %>%
  holidays_add("2019-02-21") %>%
  holidays_remove("2019-02-18")

cal_tweaked
#> <Calendar: united_states>
#> Added holidays: 
#>    -  2019-02-21
#> Removed holidays: 
#>    -  2019-02-18
```

Running the same code as before with the updated calendar has different
results. `"2019-02-15"` now shifts forward over the weekend but lands on
`"2019-02-18"`, since we removed Valentine’s Day as a holiday. Shifting
`"2019-02-19"` 5 business days forwards now no longer lands on another
Tuesday since `"2019-02-21"` is now an additional holiday. Instead, it
lands one day further on a Wednesday.

``` r
costs %>%
  mutate(
    dates_wday = wday(dates, label = TRUE),
    one_day = cal_shift(dates, days(1), cal = cal_tweaked),
    one_wday = wday(one_day, label = TRUE),
    five_days = cal_shift(dates, days(5), cal = cal_tweaked),
    five_wday = wday(five_days, label = TRUE),
  )
#> # A tibble: 5 x 7
#>     cost dates      dates_wday one_day    one_wday five_days  five_wday
#>    <dbl> <date>     <ord>      <date>     <ord>    <date>     <ord>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13 Wed        2019-02-14 Thu      2019-02-20 Wed      
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14 Thu        2019-02-15 Fri      2019-02-22 Fri      
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15 Fri        2019-02-18 Mon      2019-02-25 Mon      
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19 Tue        2019-02-20 Wed      2019-02-27 Wed      
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20 Wed        2019-02-22 Fri      2019-02-28 Thu
```

You can also generate date sequences relative to these calendars.

``` r
# Skips over the weekend, and Valentine's Day (2019-02-18)
cal_seq("2019-02-15", "2019-02-25", 1, cal = cal)
#> [1] "2019-02-15" "2019-02-19" "2019-02-20" "2019-02-21" "2019-02-22"
#> [6] "2019-02-25"

# Skips over the weekend, includes Valentine's Day, skips over the additional
# holiday on 2019-02-21
cal_seq("2019-02-15", "2019-02-25", 1, cal = cal_tweaked)
#> [1] "2019-02-15" "2019-02-18" "2019-02-19" "2019-02-20" "2019-02-22"
#> [6] "2019-02-25"
```

## References

This package embeds a hand curated subset of
[QuantLib](https://github.com/lballabio/QuantLib) to handle the date
calculations. almanac is standalone, and does not require a separate
installation of QuantLib.

There are a few other packages out there that have attempted similar
projects.

  - [RQuantLib](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rquantlib) exposes a few
    of the adjustment tools from QuantLib, but provides no support for
    custom calendars and holidays. Additionally, it requires a separate
    installation of QuantLib to link to, which can be a bit heavy. Other
    than that, it is a great tool with a more broad subset of utilities,
    such as option pricing.

  - [RcppQuantuccia](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rcppquantuccia) is
    a header only subset of QuantLib that also includes the calendar
    sections, but again has no support for custom calendars. It did
    provide me with some of the basic infrastructure to get started
    though, so I’m grateful for that.

  - [bizdays](https://github.com/wilsonfreitas/R-bizdays) has the most
    similar API and range of features to almanac.

Commit message:

President's Day not Valentine's Day

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# almanac

<!-- badges: start -->

<!-- badges: end -->

almanac provides tools for working with dates relative to business
calendars. Specifically, it provides utilities to:

  - Create calendar objects with predefined holidays / weekends.

  - Extend or tweak these calendar objects with custom holidays.

  - Shift dates forwards or backwards relative to a calendar, skipping
    over weekends and holidays.

  - Generate date sequences relative to a calendar, skipping over
    weekends and holidays.

## Installation

You can NOT install almanac from [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org).

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("DavisVaughan/almanac")
```

## Examples

``` r
library(almanac)
library(lubridate, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
library(dplyr, warn.conflicts = FALSE)
set.seed(123)
```

Imagine you have a sequence of business dates indexing some value, like
a business cost.

``` r
costs <- tibble(
  cost = rnorm(5, mean = 10000, sd = 500),
  dates = as.Date("2019-02-13") + c(0:2, 6:7)
)

costs
#> # A tibble: 5 x 2
#>     cost dates     
#>    <dbl> <date>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20
```

Importantly, these are *business dates*. Generally, that means that
there won’t be any weekend values, and holidays are observed and also
won’t generate any values. In this data set, `02/16 - 02/17` is a
weekend, and `02/18` is President’s Day.

To perform any kind of rolling calculation correctly, you might need to
“look forwards” by some number of business days. This is different
from just looking forward “1 day”, because when you are at Friday, you
really want to look forward to Monday. But if Monday is a holiday (as it
is here\!), you really want that to actually shift to Tuesday, the
actual next business day.

almanac provides tools for constructing calendars with holidays and
weekend support to help with these problems.

Notice that in the example below, `"2019-02-15"` is shifted to
`"2019-02-19"` when we request a 1 day shift (using a
`lubridate::days()` period object\!). It skips over the weekend and
President’s Day to locate the next business day.

In the 5 day shift, `"2019-02-19"`, a Tuesday, is shifted all the way to
`"2019-02-26"`, the next Tuesday, which corresponds to a “business week”
and skips over the weekend.

``` r
# Construct a calendar object, the default is a US calendar
cal <- calendar()
cal
#> <Calendar: united_states>

# Use the new calendar object alongside `cal_shift()` to shift 
# by a number of business days.
costs %>%
  mutate(
    dates_wday = wday(dates, label = TRUE),
    one_day = cal_shift(dates, days(1), cal = cal),
    one_wday = wday(one_day, label = TRUE),
    five_days = cal_shift(dates, days(5), cal = cal),
    five_wday = wday(five_days, label = TRUE),
  )
#> # A tibble: 5 x 7
#>     cost dates      dates_wday one_day    one_wday five_days  five_wday
#>    <dbl> <date>     <ord>      <date>     <ord>    <date>     <ord>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13 Wed        2019-02-14 Thu      2019-02-21 Thu      
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14 Thu        2019-02-15 Fri      2019-02-22 Fri      
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15 Fri        2019-02-19 Tue      2019-02-25 Mon      
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19 Tue        2019-02-20 Wed      2019-02-26 Tue      
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20 Wed        2019-02-21 Thu      2019-02-27 Wed
```

You can tweak the calendar by adding new holidays, or removing existing
ones. Here we add Thursday the 21st as a holiday, but remove President’s
Day for that year.

``` r
cal_tweaked <- cal %>%
  holidays_add("2019-02-21") %>%
  holidays_remove("2019-02-18")

cal_tweaked
#> <Calendar: united_states>
#> Added holidays: 
#>    -  2019-02-21
#> Removed holidays: 
#>    -  2019-02-18
```

Running the same code as before with the updated calendar has different
results. `"2019-02-15"` now shifts forward over the weekend but lands on
`"2019-02-18"`, since we removed President’s Day as a holiday. Shifting
`"2019-02-19"` 5 business days forwards now no longer lands on another
Tuesday since `"2019-02-21"` is now an additional holiday. Instead, it
lands one day further on a Wednesday.

``` r
costs %>%
  mutate(
    dates_wday = wday(dates, label = TRUE),
    one_day = cal_shift(dates, days(1), cal = cal_tweaked),
    one_wday = wday(one_day, label = TRUE),
    five_days = cal_shift(dates, days(5), cal = cal_tweaked),
    five_wday = wday(five_days, label = TRUE),
  )
#> # A tibble: 5 x 7
#>     cost dates      dates_wday one_day    one_wday five_days  five_wday
#>    <dbl> <date>     <ord>      <date>     <ord>    <date>     <ord>    
#> 1  9720. 2019-02-13 Wed        2019-02-14 Thu      2019-02-20 Wed      
#> 2  9885. 2019-02-14 Thu        2019-02-15 Fri      2019-02-22 Fri      
#> 3 10779. 2019-02-15 Fri        2019-02-18 Mon      2019-02-25 Mon      
#> 4 10035. 2019-02-19 Tue        2019-02-20 Wed      2019-02-27 Wed      
#> 5 10065. 2019-02-20 Wed        2019-02-22 Fri      2019-02-28 Thu
```

You can also generate date sequences relative to these calendars.

``` r
# Skips over the weekend, and President's Day (2019-02-18)
cal_seq("2019-02-15", "2019-02-25", 1, cal = cal)
#> [1] "2019-02-15" "2019-02-19" "2019-02-20" "2019-02-21" "2019-02-22"
#> [6] "2019-02-25"

# Skips over the weekend, includes President's Day, skips over the additional
# holiday on 2019-02-21
cal_seq("2019-02-15", "2019-02-25", 1, cal = cal_tweaked)
#> [1] "2019-02-15" "2019-02-18" "2019-02-19" "2019-02-20" "2019-02-22"
#> [6] "2019-02-25"
```

## References

This package embeds a hand curated subset of
[QuantLib](https://github.com/lballabio/QuantLib) to handle the date
calculations. almanac is standalone, and does not require a separate
installation of QuantLib.

There are a few other packages out there that have attempted similar
projects.

  - [RQuantLib](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rquantlib) exposes a few
    of the adjustment tools from QuantLib, but provides no support for
    custom calendars and holidays. Additionally, it requires a separate
    installation of QuantLib to link to, which can be a bit heavy. Other
    than that, it is a great tool with a more broad subset of utilities,
    such as option pricing.

  - [RcppQuantuccia](https://github.com/eddelbuettel/rcppquantuccia) is
    a header only subset of QuantLib that also includes the calendar
    sections, but again has no support for custom calendars. It did
    provide me with some of the basic infrastructure to get started
    though, so I’m grateful for that.

  - [bizdays](https://github.com/wilsonfreitas/R-bizdays) has the most
    similar API and range of features to almanac.
